Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Official YIFY movies site:
Camera speed. Vinnie 4.
Take one. Mark.
The 20th Century gave us
so many misconceptions
when it came to health.
One egg equals
five cigarettes.
Eggs cannot legally
even be called safe.
Cutting down on meat
is a good idea.
So. is the pendulum
swinging back
in the opposite direction?
Where are we since
the last movie came out?
Is there progress?
Has meat made a comeback?
In some cases. I can say yes.
I swear by the ketogenic diet.
I hear more doctors
talking about it.
The low carbohydrate
keto community
is based on science.
And I can see a few things
moving in a direction
that people want to see it
move into.
There is a bottom-up
revolution going on.
But then I see
the other side of it.
There was another
vegan propaganda movie
that came out
in this past year.
Surprise. surprise. there was
a product hooked to it.
The impossible burger
is the world's only burger
that looks. handles.
smells. cooks and tastes
like ground beef from cows.
People are becoming
guinea pigs.
Completely replace animals
as a food production technology
by 2035.
InFat. part one.
we talked about the war
for information.
But I actually think we also
live in a war with ourselves.
It's almost like we're gaming
the system of our own bodies.
We're trying to get
our system to do
what it's not supposed to do.
"Eat this. eat that.
don't eat this.
don't eat that."
Our program is known
as a starch-based diet.
"Take this supplement.
"it'll make your muscles
grow bigger."
We have more questions
than ever.
And the world always speeds up
and it gets more frenzied
all the time.
and sometimes even people
who are so-called experts
don't know what's going on.
You suck it all up.
Mmm.
"This study says this."
"That study says that."
"Well. that study
wasn't done correctly."
"This is healthy."
"That's not healthy."
The answers we're searching for
seem to have
these long winding roads
that eventually
lead to nothing.
But maybe it doesn't have
to be so hard.
In this movie
we're going to expand
on what we talked about in
Fat. part one.
We're going to talk to
the same experts
you saw before.
-But let them
stretch out a little bit.
-Great.
We're going to discuss
why some of the things
we believe are wrong.
Fat tends to cause you
to be fat.
We're going to
also get into why
some of these things are right.
Based on the research.
we cannot say
with any certainty
that eating red
or processed meat
causes cancer. diabetes
or heart disease.
And also why
there's so much confusion
between the two.
It doesn't have to be
that divisive.
My name is Nina Teicholz.
I'm a science journalist
and author of book called
The Big Fat Surprise.
I'm also the executive director
of a group
called the Nutrition Coalition.
which aims to ensure
that our nutrition policy
is evidence-based.
Nina Teicholz
was a one-time vegan.
She crossed over.
She crossed the aisle.
And that led her into
ten years of research.
She went through
all the papers.
she went through
all the studies
to come back to figure out
where we had gone wrong.
And it's the work
like her book.
The Big Fat Surprise.
that has led a lot of this
pendulum swing.
in my opinion. to start moving
in the right direction.
I got into this field
just completely by accident.
I was doing a series of
investigative food articles
for G ourmetmagazine
and one of them
that was assigned to me
was on trans fats.
Well. what are trans fats?
I had no idea.
Researching that story
really plunged me into
the whole world of dietary fat.
which is the subject that
Americans and nutrition
have obsessed about most.
And that really led me
down the rabbit hole.
For nearly a decade.
I researched everything
I could find
about dietary fat
and cholesterol.
When I started
doing my research.
I couldn't believe
the kind of reactions
that I got from
interviewing scientists.
I mean. I'm the daughter
of a scientist
and in my father's
"dreams" journal.
if you open up.
there are math equations.
I always thought that science
was full of people like him.
who rationally. soberly.
would discuss interesting ideas
and consider other ideas
and change their minds
based on
the scientific observations.
And instead.
in nutrition science.
I couldn't believe
what I found.
People who were afraid
to talk to me.
People who said.
"If you're going to take
that line on dietary fat.
I can't even talk to you."
There is some huge story here.
If people are afraid
to talk to me.
that means there's
a really big story here.
Saturated fats.
butter. lard. cheese.
fatty beef
and poultry with the skin on.
all said to be
bad for your heart.
but you should replace
most saturated fats
with more monounsaturated
healthy fats
which help reduce your risk
of heart attack and stroke.
Limit red meat.
dark poultry meat.
or poultry with the skin on
to a serving the size of
a deck of cards per day.
In good science.
you try to do
everything you can
not to go public prematurely
because as soon
as you go public.
as soon as you claim
you've discovered
something you haven't
or you've realized something
that you don't have evidence
to support.
all these consequences kick in
and make it virtually
impossible to back out of.
My name's Gary Taubes.
I'm an investigative journalist.
co-founder of a not for profit
research organization
called the
Nutrition Science Initiative.
author of Good Calories.
Bad Calories
and Why We Get Fat.
of The Case Against Sugar.
Gary Taubes is largely
considered a lightning rod.
Gary has never shied away
from media.
He will go up against anyone
because what he has on his side
is a little thing called facts.
I often asked myself
when I was writing
Good Calories. Bad Calories.
it's like. I have friends
who sort of have
conspiratorial turns of mind
where they think
people do things
because they're venal
and they're getting
paid by industry.
And I just think. "I don't see
any conspiracy there."
I don't really think
the industry
had much to do with that.
The food industry was given
this enormous gift
of this bad science.
And these people just literally
could not have caused more harm
if there had been a conspiracy.
At least if there had been
a conspiracy.
enterprising
Washington Postreporters
could have interviewed
the right people in garages
in Washington and exposed it.
My name is Dr. Eric Westman.
I'm an associate professor
of medicine
at Duke University
Medical Center in Durham.
North Carolina.
The US government got involved
in creating guidelines
for what people should eat.
And it was not based
on science.
What can you say
about Eric Westman?
You know.
the original Atkins Diet
has been around
since the early 1970s.
But when they wanted
to update it.
they had to find a doctor
to write that.
Eric Westman is that guy.
He wrote The New Atkins for the New You.
He also started
his own little obesity clinic
over on the east coast.
The guy is just phenomenal.
I was involved in
research communities
where we would look
at a guideline
and see that as a straw man.
as something to either prove
or disprove.
So unfortunately. the research
that was going to support
and back up
the low fat guideline
never proved
that it was healthy.
What's the information people
are getting about their health.
because everybody wants
to know what does it
mean to be healthy?
And that's sucha difficult question to answer.
They're interested
in their health.
they've been searching
for answers.
And they found an answer
that has actually done them
more harm than good
in the long run.
Bret Scher
was this great guy I met
when he came on my
Fitness Confidentialpodcast.
And just fell in love
with this guy.
He's a cardiologist
who doesn't believe
that red meat will kill you.
He also feels the same way
about saturated fat
and cholesterol.
which is a paradigm shift
when you think about it
because there are not
many cardiologists out there
that are thinking that way.
Hormones in our body
play a huge role.
So. things that raise
our insulin
are going to encourage
our bodies to store more fat.
So just because you're taking
fat out of something
and then you're enhancing it
with increased
carbs and sugars.
that is actually making
this problem worse.
not helping it.
Clearly this idea that
we are supposed to avoid fat
has been a major factor
in causing. paradoxically.
the obesity epidemic.
That's the big myth.
the idea that it's dangerous
to eat natural foods
with fat and cholesterol in it.
Andreas Eenfeldt is a great guy
who noticed that
the more medicine
he handed out.
the sicker people got.
And he felt that there
had to be a better way.
So he started
working with food.
pulling certain things out
of people's diets.
adding other things.
And the certain things
were junk foods. and sugars.
and grains.
and this sort of thing.
And he started adding in
red meat. and fish.
and more fatty foods.
and noticed that people
were healing right up.
If you avoid fat.
you end up being hungrier
and you have to eat more
of something else
to feel satisfied.
And that something else
is carbohydrates.
Obviously. aside from
the way it looks.
you end up eating a lot more
sugar. processed carbs.
That is probably the cause
of the obesity epidemic today.
By this point.
everyone knows
there's an obesity epidemic.
And while we can argue all day about fat versus low fat.
pretty much everyone agrees
that sugar is bad for you.
Sugar makes insulin work better
and cures diabetics.
Well.
almost everyone.
But we'll get to that later.
BMI is one of the most
commonly used measurements
to determine if you're obese.
But the newest research says
that BMI may not be reliable.
The biggest problem
with getting useful data
has to do with
doing the math honestly.
We actually have a problem
of philosophy with science
right now.
We have a replication crisis
where things
can't be replicated.
We have people who do research
that do something
called P-Mining.
The P is sort
of the statistical
significance of your study.
You can actually get your data
and then find
the statistical model
that fits best to prove
that your data is working.
I'm Dr. Drew Pinsky.
I'm an internist
and addictionologist.
Dr. Drew. look. like everyone
else in LA. we love Dr. Drew.
all those years of Loveline.
But the fact that he does what he does with addiction medicine
and the lives he has saved.
I'm happy to call
Drew Pinsky a friend.
The way we examine populations.
we're looking at sort of
average effects on the mean.
So people on either end
may have
very different physiologies
that have very different sorts
of interventions
that we're completely missing.
There's really a crisis coming
in the philosophy of science.
Intelligent people
should know
the difference between
causality and correlation.
And weirdly enough.
in this field of nutrition.
because it's so hard to do
the necessary experiments.
what you end up with
are correlations between
health and disease.
And one of the correlations
is that people
who consume
a lot of artificial sweeteners
tend to be
more obese and diabetic
than people who don't.
Artificial sweeteners have been a staple for dieters
since the 1980s.
And there's a real debate
about the harm they cause.
The problem is. if you think
about who uses
artificial sweeteners
are the people
who have weight problems.
the people who can't control
their weight drinking
full sugar sodas.
And so. you have no idea
which way the causality runs.
whether these people
are unhealthy
because they consume
artificial sweeteners
or whether they consume
because they're unhealthy
and they're predisposed
to get fat.
The major points about
your diet really sort of
hover around two things.
fat. fruits. and vegetables.
You've got to really get your
saturated fat and trans fat
as low as you possibly can.
And we know that if we do that.
you can actually decrease
your risk of coronary
heart disease 40/50 percent.
There is a correlation between
obesity and heart disease
in that people with obesity
often have other risk factors
like high blood sugar.
high blood pressure.
dyslipidemia. meaning
bad cholesterol profile.
And all these things increase
the risk of heart disease.
It's so easy
to blame heart disease
on fat.
Let's take a hamburger
for instance.
They'll say. "Well.
"red meat is bad for you
because it's in a hamburger."
They won't take into account
that there was ketchup.
mayonnaise.
a big breaded bun. and all of the other condiments around it.
And guess what? Most people
never eat a hamburger
without French fries.
But they never blame it
on the seed oils.
they never blame it
on the bread.
they never blame it on any
of the goop that's put on it.
They just go to the meat
and say.
"Meat. bad.
Meat causes heart disease."
It makes no sense.
It's black and white thinking
combined with numerous studies coming out of respected names
like Harvard that lead people
to believe that things
may not be true.
What does Harvard
have to do with this?
The role that Harvard plays
in the nutrition story
is a sad and powerful one.
Extremely powerful.
If you compare butter
with calories from
refined starch and sugar.
it's going to be
pretty much a wash.
They'll both have adverse
impacts on metabolic factors
and on risk of heart disease
and diabetes.
Harvard is home
to two of the largest
nutritional epidemiological
databases in the country.
What is that?
That's a kind of science
where they take
a large group of people
and they follow them for years.
And they ask them what they eat
and then they see who dies
or has a heart attack
or gets cancer.
This is a kind of science
that is so fundamentally weak.
Right? I mean. people are asked
how many cups of spare ribs did you have in the last year.
or how many peaches.
or how many plums
did you eat
on average per week?
Hundreds of questions.
First of all.
people lie about what they eat.
They want to please themselves
or they want to please
the interviewers.
And this has been
documented in science.
Secondly. that dietary data.
even when they try
to validate it.
they find that
it is highly unreliable.
So you're talking about
very. very weak evidence.
Right? And then
this kind of science.
epidemiology. can never prove
cause and effect.
It can only show
an association.
So it was only ever meant
to generate hypotheses.
which then go on to be tested.
The way you test
something properly.
to show cause and effect.
is to test it in a randomized.
controlled. clinical trial.
This weak science that Harvard
has been publishing on
dominates the whole
nutrition landscape.
And it is what is echoed
throughout all of the media.
"Oh. this is only association
but not causation."
But then they just breeze
right by that
with headlines that say things
like. "Coconut oil kills you."
when that headline should read.
"Coconut oil. we have found
a small. weak association
"between coconut oil
and increased risk
of cardiovascular disease."
People who eat
a lot of red meat.
who are those people?
Those are the people who have
ignored their doctor's orders
for the last 35 years.
That means they do a lot
of other unhealthy things.
They probably drink too much.
they don't go
to cultural events.
they don't follow
their doctor's orders.
they don't take their medicine.
They don't have
happy family lives.
Maybe they live next to
a toxic waste dump
because they're poor.
or whatever.
And then they come out
with a finding that said.
"Red meat eaters.
"people who eat
a lot of red meat.
"tend to die earlier."
Well. was it the meat?
Was it the unhealthy lifestyle?
Was it the excessive
binge drinking?
It could have been any one
of these other things.
But that is why this science
is so fundamentally weak.
Your overall lifestyle.
food just being one factor.
is going to determine
your overall health.
If you eat well.
change your habits.
don't smoke.
maybe start exercising.
well. you'll be healthier.
The problem is that
studies get done
where people get healthier
by changing everything
about their life.
and then the results are touted as food being the reason
they got healthier.
This is especially rampant
among vegan studies.
There have been some
studies in the past.
some small studies.
that have had some problems
with them.
that have been propagated
over and over again
showing that diet
can reverse heart disease.
And a big one was
the Ornish studies in the '90s.
If you eat more calories
than you burn.
then you gain weight.
Fat tends
to cause you to be fat
because fat is very dense
in calories.
Fat has nine calories per gram.
whereas protein and carbs
have only four. less than half.
So an optimal diet is low
in fat. low in the bad carbs.
high in the good carbs.
and enough of the good fats.
And then again.
it's a spectrum.
When you move
in this direction.
you're going to lose weight.
you're going to feel better
and you're going to
gain health.
What's frequently lost
in that is that
that was a whole
lifestyle program.
So they got people
to quit smoking. exercise more.
manage their stress.
and follow a vegetarian diet.
But what's come out of that
is that a vegetarian diet
reverses heart disease.
And you can't say that
from that type of a study.
A vegan approach.
a vegetarian approach.
is consistent with
standard dietary guidelines.
And the question is.
"Is that really
a healthy approach?"
I'm Dr. Jeff Gerber.
I'm a board certified family
doctor from Denver. Colorado.
I've been a doctor
for over 30 years.
About 20 years ago.
I realized I didn't know much
about nutrition.
So I took it upon myself
to learn more.
And I use nutrition as a tool
to treat
and prevent chronic disease.
I look at Jeffry Gerber
and I think. "Hero."
He looked around
and went.
"Wait a minute.
I'm healing people with food.
"What I'm doing.
"what I was taught in school
is not working."
Instead of just going down
the road the way the AHA
or the ADA does.
where they just
keep spewing the same lies
hoping for different results.
Jeffry Gerber looked around
and said.
"Hey. we need to do
something about this."
We think.
especially with vegan diets.
it's quite a challenge
because you're often deficient
of macronutrients
that you would get
from animal-based proteins.
Most people tell me
they feel great
when they go on a vegan diet
only to feel bad later.
My view has always been.
well. when you go
on a vegan diet.
you're cutting out
a bunch of crap.
a bunch of processed food
in your life.
But at some point.
it's not sustainable.
I think there are lots
of different approaches
that can be healthy.
You could even do an extreme
diet like a vegan diet
and feel great because
you're not having sugar.
You're reducing the starches
that raise the blood sugar.
But in my experience.
some people will blindly follow
certain diets.
including the vegan diet.
and gain 50 to 100 pounds
and never even think
that the vegan diet
might be the cause because
they know it's healthy.
Because everyone else says
it's healthy.
it must be the plastic
in my bottle that's
causing the obesity.
It must be the microbiome
or that I'm not sleeping.
when actually it was the food
that they were eating.
As a cardiologist.
I've come across
a number of patients
who are vegans.
And of course.
I read the literature every day
that supports a vegan diet
for heart health.
Unfortunately.
for a lot of vegans.
it takes a lot of work
to maintain a vegan lifestyle.
You have to think about food
all the time.
you have to prepare your food
you are hungry all the time.
A number of people
have decreased energy.
So I think that is a downfall
to the vegan way of life.
not that there can't be
healthy vegans.
Of course there can.
But the question is.
"For how long?"
Today we're going
to explore all
of the vitamins and nutrients
you might need on a vegan diet.
Vitamin b12. calcium. iron.
choline. Omega-3 fatty acids.
iodine. zinc. selenium.
They don't make
a very good argument.
And especially like.
they want to come after meat
as being unhealthy
in multiple ways.
leading to heart attack
and to diabetes.
And you have to understand
that a lot of their comments
are based on the ethical
treatment of animals.
And we feel the same way.
that we do want to
treat animals ethically.
But that has nothing to do
with health.
Can we prosper and thrive by
feasting. in effect.
on animals?
And that worries me
personally as well.
Part of the movement
is driven by the idea
that eating animal products
are unhealthy.
which I think
is just bad science.
But unfortunately. the leaders.
the proponents of
the vegetarian/vegan movement
don't like the argument
we're making
'cause we're saying...
Not only are we arguing that
the problem isn't red meat
and animal products.
but we're arguing that people
can be very healthy.
and perhaps healthiest. eating
animal product rich diets.
One of the questions today
is why we're so anti red meat.I've really wondered about that.
It goes back to the 1970s
when really
the kind of burgeoning
of the vegetarian movement
in the United States.
in my hometown.
Berkeley. California.
That was the time
the peace movement...
We had just come out
of two World Wars
and we wanted to make peace.
not war.
Meat has always. throughout all
of history and every culture.
been associated with virility.
It's the food of warriors.
It's the food of people
who make war.
And it gives men and women
muscle mass.
It makes them strong.
For instance.
in the Maasai warriors.
who were studied rigorously by
the University of Vanderbilt
scientists in the 1970s.
they found that
the warrior class.
but not the women.
the warriors
consumed only meat.
Meat. milk. and blood
was their entire diet.
So now we're being told...
Americans are being told
in the 1970s.
not to eat meat because
we want to make peace instead.
This was sort of our modern
idea of masculinity.
And it totally makes sense
for a culture
that does not want
to be at war.
It is so interesting if you
look at the way we used to eat
before the obesity
and the health epidemic.
And red meat
was plentiful then.
And then. when things changed.
with the McGovern Report.
with Ancel Keys'
Seven Countries Study.
with President Eisenhower's
heart attack.
with that conglomeration
of events.
now fat being demonized
and red meat being demonized.
that's when everything changed.
And it happened to coincide
with the health epidemic
that we're having now.
Red meat is back
in vogue again.
I mean with the paleo diet.
you have low carb diets.
you have Atkins...
You even have
my very own
"no sugars. no grains"
approach to eating.
All allows red meat.
So everything is back
on the table again.
But it wasn't always that way
for red meat.
One of the factors
that did emerge
as being related to cancer risk
was consumption of red meat.
especially processed red meat.
in relation to risk
of colorectal cancer
and some other cancers.
I think the bias
against eating red meat
has come
from nutritional epidemiology.
These studies look
at the associations
between what people eat
and then look at the effect
on the health
over a long period of time.
But in the clinical
research world.
these are thought of
as relatively weak studies.
And the association level
has been really low
for red meat and cancer
for example.
Why can't people
eat meat and vegetables?
Why is this controversial?
It's food.
Both are real and both
can fit into your diet.
This "either or" argument
that's going on
has nothing to do
with health
and more to do
with ideology.
They were yelling like.
"Don't eat chickens.
don't eat meat."
And I was like.
"Well. I love chicken."
These are two distinct
phenomena I think.
One is this identification
with a group
and tribalism around which
diet is yet another
manifestation of that.
But this need to move
from fad. to fad. to fad.
that's consumerism.
That is us needing a solution
to how we're feeling
or looking or how we think
about ourselves
with something now.
Buy something now.
do something now.
and fix everything.
fix how I'm feeling now.
And fad diets
suit that beautifully.
I think the media
has a lot to do
with our ill
psychological well-being.
To blame diet
and sedentary lifestyle...
I mean. I've heard blame on TV
my entire life.
But it's us. I mean. look.
people that create mediaonly create stuff that we watch.
It's us that
they're creating it for.
If we didn't watch.
they wouldn't create it
the way they do.
So we need to watch
ourselves and learn
how to train ourselves
not to consume this garbage
in such a unthoughtful way.
Bad news for bacon
and sausage lovers.
The World Health Organization
says those foods
can cause colon
and stomach cancer.
Again. a lot of this
information does come
from media.
who loves to tout institutions like Harvard
whenever they put out
dietary findings.
"Harvard said this.
Harvard said that.
"Why shouldn't
we believe Harvard?"
Walter Willett
of Harvard University
is widely considered to be
the most influential person
in nutrition science today.
He presides over
the largest two
what's called epidemiological
databases in the country.
And those databases.
you have to understand.
all I need to do is
to find an association.
It's just a whole bunch
of statistics
in there they get from
dietary questionnaires.
And they can just. like
a mimeograph machine.
they can just
pull out anything.
Like meat is associated
with this outcome.
or vegetables are associated
or French fried potatoes lead
to more this kind of cancer.
They can run
those statistical tests
all the time.
Right? Those associations...
So they're publishing
all the time.
Well. in science. sort of
the frequency of publication
is part of what
makes you powerful.
Um. and compare that
to somebody who's
doing clinical trials.
They might do a clinical trial
and it takes them two years.
And that's where they're
actually feeding people
and they...
They change their diets.
and they give them counseling.
They get one paper
out of that.
Walter Willett really believes
a vegetarian diet
high in whole grains.
is the diet
that is the healthiest
and he wants everybody
to follow that diet.
One. I think.
important concept
that's developed over
the last decade or so
is that diet quality.
the combination of foods.
the pattern of foods.
uh. is important in directly
influencing disease risk
but also in helping us better
control our body weight.
So. these we used to think
were sort of separate things.
But now they're intertwined.
And the kind of
dietary pattern
that Dr. Hu was talking about.
like a Mediterranean Diet.
that has lots of
fruits and vegetables.
low amounts of red meat.
whole grains.
that actually makes it easier
for us to control our weight
than eating a diet
of refined foods
that's directly unhealthy
but also makes it
more difficult to control
our weight.
What I found in my research
is that Harvard
has also received
a great deal of money
from one of the largest
vegetable oil manufacturers
in the world
called Unilever.
Willett is a scientific advisor
to numerous industry
backed consortiums
that promote
grain consumption.
Like Old Ways
and the International Carbohydrate Quality Consortium
all funded by Barilla Pasta
and Kellogg's
and all these carbohydrate
makers that have Willett
on as their top spokesperson
or top advisor.
organizing conferences
for them.
In 2013. I think.
when Naturemagazine.
when they had a rare
editorial kind of critique
of Walter Willett. they said
one of the things
that he did
was that he continually
simplified his data
and published data
that really ought
not to be published.
How could we find out
who to trust
besides your book.
There's overload
of information.
Anybody can set themselves up
as being an expert.
Uh. and the public is
understandably confused.
It's interesting that
there's such a crusade against red meat versus other meats.
And this really comes down
to the fact that
red meat has saturated fat
and that we've been told
that saturated fat is bad.
Is there a scenario
where we shouldn't
eat saturated fat?
There's no reason
to fear saturated fat.
It's just fine to eat.
It's not an issue for health
if you look at
the medical studies
that have tested
this hypothesis.
If you take them all together
and look at all of the data.
there's no effects
on health really.
People have been
warned for years
about the dangers of eating
too many saturated fats
and the risks they pose
for heart disease.
But a new analysis
of more than 70 studies
finds that saturated fats
do not necessarily lead
to greater problems
with heart health.
My strength
and my background
is in clinical medicine.
using a keto diet to help
fix obesity. diabetes. and
many other health problems.
I've learned a lot
by reading the books
Good Calories. Bad Calories
by Gary Taubes
and The Big Fat Surprise
by Nina Teicholz.
And one of the things
I've learned
is that the emphasis
against saturated fat
is also a political emphasis.
So. that because
America doesn't make
lots of saturated fat
kinds of products
and because the
nutritional epidemiologists
are funded by other companies
that make products that
don't have saturated fats.
there's a bias against them
which is not scientific.
If saturated fat
raises your cholesterol.
and if cholesterol
can in some situations
be related to
increased heart risk.
then anything
that is a saturated fat
must be related
to increased heart risk.
It's this line
of illogical thinking
that has led institutions
like the
American Heart Association
to demonize anything
that's a saturated fat.
Yeah. nothing against
medical doctors.
It's just that when.
you know.
when you're in a club
and they keep telling you
the same thing in the club.
and this is
the only way it is.
and you never see
any other viewpoint.
you just start believing.
Religion works like that.
You know. um.
you will be in one religion
at the expense of
every other religion.
And even though they all say
pretty much the same thing.
some people will look
at their religion and go.
"Your religion's not good
because mine's the best."
I tell people
who are in my clinic.
who are working
with other doctors
and cardiologists
in particular.
to just tell them
they're doing a Modified
Mediterranean Diet.
And the other doctor will go.
"Oh. well. that's fine."
And they won't ask any more
because they're
not really sure
what the Modified
Mediterranean Diet is.
But they know it's good.
So. I know it kind of plays
the politics a little bit.
but we're in that space
where. um.
doctors sometimes
knee jerk against things
that they don't know
and using familiar terms
can actually make it
easier for my patients
to not get pushback
from other doctors.
I guess the other
question though.
is it something magical
that's going to help everybody
shed pounds
and feel wonderful.
And the truth may
not be that far either.
But it's important
that we can't go out
and demonize one type of food
simply because
we think there's a theory
that it might be
related to something.
I mean. people listen strongly
to the recommendations
of these guidelines.
The vast majority
of the calories
are really coming
from bad stuff.
And so. if you're
looking at red meat
and don't specify
the comparison.
you may not see
much with red meat
because you're comparing it
with a lot of other
bad stuff in a diet.
a lot of refined
starch. sugar.
uh. partially
hydrogenated oils.
Epidemiology. you always
find at the bottom of
one of the Harvard papers.
"Oh. you know.
our caveat is that
it's only in association.
"It does not prove causation.
More studies are needed."
But if you look at the press
release that accompanies it.
uh. the headline
is almost always like.
you know. "Oh. coconut oil
causes heart disease."
Well. there's nothing wrong with coconut oil.
It's perfectly safe
and actually very healthy
to use in your diet
and in cooking.
Good for your skin.
not good in your body.
But we always hear about
these controversies
coming out
and it only has to do
with the fact that
other industries who are
making hydrogenated oils
don't want this
pure natural oil
to be anywhere
near their product.
The big problem
with coconut oil
is it's high
in saturated fats.
And as the American
Heart Association tells us.
saturated fat can increase
your bad cholesterol.
and that can lead
to heart disease.
Coconut and palm oil
have definitely been
polarizing oils
over the past few years.
and it's so interesting
to see why.
You know. they're...
First. they're
vegetarian based oils.
So. based on that.
you would think that
they should be healthy
if the myth of vegetarian
being the best diet is true.
But because they have
saturated fats.
the American Heart Association
came out against them
cautioning their ingestion
because they have
saturated fat.
So. it's that transitive
property of math
that doesn't always work.
I was invited once to speak
at a palm oil conference
by the manufacturers
of palm oil.
And they explained to me that
they were having difficulty
getting through
a sort of taboo or cartel
against palm oil
because of the saturated fat
in the food.
And because we know
saturated fat is bad
and all that.
And I think it was
in Nina Teicholz's book
where I first learned that.
The whole campaign against
so-called tropical oils.
which is coconut oil
and palm oil.
In my research. I discovered
that this was
something of just a trade war
between industries.
And it's been going on.
uh. actually since
the 1920s and '30s.
Palm oil. I think
it was at the time.
started being imported
in increasing amounts
from Malaysia.
And the vegetable
oil industry said.
"We can't have this happen.
They're talking over
our market share."
And underwent
this huge campaign
basically to just
slander these oils.
And actually I think that
what they did is they put
a tax on it at that point.
They got the government
to tax these oils
because they didn't
want the competition.
Fast forward to 1980s.
There's a rise
in the use. again.
of coconut oil and palm oil
because they are solid.
safe fats. so they're good
for popping popcorn
in movie theaters.
They were used by all
the packaged food companies
like Kraft.
Nabisco used them
for their cereals
and anything that
needed to stay safe
and solid on a shelf
in a supermarket.
So. there started to be
this increase in
the importation again
of coconut oil and palm oil.
Well. that really threatened
the makers of soy bean oil
and the soy bean industry
because soy bean
is far and away
the biggest oil that
Americans consume.
So. they started a campaign
against coconut oil
and palm oil.
They call them
the tropical oils.
And this was a campaign.
really a trade war campaign
sort of in the shroud
of a health concern issue.
So. if they're going to say
something like that.
they should have
very strong evidence
behind it to back it up.
And there is no evidence
to demonize these oils
the way they have.
They can be a very good part
of a healthy diet
and there's no reason at all
to be worried about them
as has been proposed.
There's a lot of bad science
that I think implicates
saturated fat
and leads to this idea
that we should replace it
with vegetable oils.
"Oh. those must be
good for us because
they're vegetables."
In fact. they're
not from vegetables.
they're from seeds and beans.
So. sunflower. safflower.
corn. soy bean.
they're all beans and seeds.
And you have to use high heat
and a heavy metal chelate
in order to get the oils
out of them.
Winterized. deodorized
and stabilized.
I mean. they initially
come out of this gray.
disgusting liquid.
And then they have to be
turned into something
that might seem like
it could be consumed
for humans.
And they've also gone
through name changes.
Now they're trying
to call them plant oils
I think.
to seem even more appealing.
If you compare saturated fat
with healthy plant oils.
uh. using those
healthy plant oils
will definitely reduce
the risk of heart disease
while they're improving
blood lipids at the same time.
You know. healthy people
tend to eat vegetable oils.
It's the jest of the problem
when you do these studies.
what you do is you
tell people how to eat.
So. in the 1970s.
you tell them they should
avoid saturated fat
and eat vegetable oils
and then you follow them
for 30 years
and lo and behold
you find out 30 years later
that healthier people
have indeed been doing exactly
what you told them to do
because they're
health conscious.
By the end of the 1980s.
between that campaign
and various other efforts
to get rid of tropical oils.
most of the tropical oils
had been taken out
of the food supply.
And so. they're
avoiding saturated fats
and using vegetable oils
to cook with instead.
and they're healthier.
But that doesn't mean
they got healthier
because they used
the vegetable oils.
You know. I do wonder
if the recent outcry
against tropical oils
that you've seen by
the American Heart Association
and by Harvard.
I really wonder to what extent
we're seeing just a redux
of this same trade war.
I know that Harvard is funded
by vegetable oil companies
that compete
with tropical oils.
So. one really has to wonder
if they're now sort of
trotting out scientists
to protect the domestic
American soy bean
and soy bean oil industries.
So. there are two changes
that I think are necessary.
First. we need to get away
from this idea that
saturated fat is bad for us.
It's really not
a major factor.
We need to accept that
saturated fat can be part
of a healthy diet.
Second thing.
we need to get away
from is this idea
that it's all about calories.
that just by counting calories.
eating less.
and running more you would
magically sort of lose weight.
It's really not effective for
the vast majority of people
and we need to focus more on
the hormonal regulation
of weight.
live in a way that
makes our body
normalize the hormones
including the fat storing
hormone insulin.
so that it becomes much easier
to maintain a good weight.
The fact of the matter is
exercise is very important.
I always call it
the fountain of youth.
The problem is that it's
not good for weight loss.
We've been teaching people
you have to exercise.
And I've had people
who can't exercise
because of a bum knee
or just they don't like it
and they don't even
try to lose weight
or fix their diabetes
because they've been told
they have to exercise.
In fact. this is perpetuated
by a lot of doctors as well.
And because
it's worked for them.
they think it'll work
for other people.
Now. I'm a big proponent
of exercise
and I think exercise
is crucial for a healthy
overall lifestyle.
But it's not the go-to way
to lose weight.
It was in the best interest
of these snack companies
and the companies making
the high carbohydrate.
low fat foods.
It was in their
best interest to say
as long as you're exercising
and as long as you're
burning calories
then you can eat whatever
you want and however
much you want.
That's what padded
their bottom line.
And that's what
sold more products.
And that's what helped
perpetuate this myth
that exercise was
the best thing you could do
for your health
and you could exercise away
any amount
of poor dietary indiscretion.
In theory. the idea makes a lot of sense.
You burn calories
through exercise.
which must lead to fat loss.
The laws of thermodynamics
is a good idea.
It just doesn't work here.
You cannot outrun a bad diet.
So. modern
nutrition science begins
in the late 1860s
with the invention
by German researchers
of devices called calorimeters
that allow you to measure
the energy expended
by a large animal
like a dog or a human.
So. you live
inside these rooms
and you can get a measurement
of how much energy's expended.
And so. by the 1860s.
the nutrition community.
for the first time ever.
can measure the energy that
people consume in foods
and burn the foods in what's
called a bomb calorimeter.
And you measure
the heat released
and that tells you how much
energy was in the foods.
And now you can measure
the energy out.
And for the next
50 to 60 years.
all of nutrition science...
All of nutrition science
was basically measuring
energy in and energy out
and vitamin and mineral
deficiency diseases
and protein requirements
and a little bit
about things like fiber.
And so. by the early 1900s.
when researchers.
clinical investigators.
physicians
interested in these problems
are trying to come up
with a hypothesis of obesity.
And related to
the food we consume.
all they have are
energy in. energy out.
vitamins. minerals.
protein. fiber.
And they can't figure out
a way that vitamins
and minerals
and protein and fiber
can play a meaningful
role in obesity.
So they end up with
energy in and energy out.
That's it.
That's because that's what
they can measure.
And that becomes
a theory ever since.
And it gets locked in.
And it stays locked in.
That's the weird thing.
And 1921-22.
the hormone insulin
is discovered
and the science
of endocrinology.
of hormones
and hormone related diseases
starts to explode.
But you still can't measure
the impact of food
on the hormone levels
in the blood until the 1960s.
So. it's only in the 1960s.
that you have another way
that you can study
that food influences
what our body is doing.
And by that time we've
had 50 years of thinking
of obesity as an
energy balance disorder.
We realize that
if you change
the hormonal status.
elevate insulin levels.
depress glucagon levels.
You know. growth hormone
is playing a role
and our foods
are influencing all of that.
Nobody cares.
It's just too complicated.
This energy balance idea
is too big to fail.
And then diet book doctors
get involved.
First Herman Taller
writes a book called
Calories Don't Count
and then the infamous
Robert Atkins.
And they read the research
and they say.
"Wait a minute.
Wait a minute.
"It's not about
how much you eat.
"It's a hormonal thing.
"It's the carbs are the problem.Get rid of the carbs."
And now the research community
doesn't like this idea
'cause it's coming
from these cowboy
diet book doctors.
And they don't want to
listen to them.
Some very petty
human emotions
feed into this idea that
we should continue
to tell people to do
the wrong thing.
And they should
do the wrong thing.
and if it fails
we can blame them.
Never think that
our advice is wrong
'cause we've got
the laws of thermal dynamics
propping them up.
We always
get into this argument over
what's the best fuel
to put in your body.
One thing everyone agrees on
is that sugar is bad for you.
And when I say everyone.
I mean almost everyone.
Some doctors. including one
who proposes a vegan diet.
says sugar is not
the major cause of diabetes.
You really have to
see this to believe it.
Carbohydrate. including
pure white sugar.
increases the sensitivity
to insulin.
It was published by Brunzell
from the
University of Washington
in The New England Journal
of Medicinein.
I think. '78.
Brunzell is his name.
He took Type 2 diabetics.
he made a synthetic diet...
45% sugar
and then double. white sugar.
multi-dextrose.
plain table sugar.
doubled it to 85% white sugar.
Every aspect of
the diabetes improved.
Walter Kempner
back in the '40s and '50s
published his results
on treating Type 2 diabetics
with rice.
table sugar. fruit and juice.
And Kempner knew
back in the '50s
that sugar makes insulin work
better and cures diabetics.
But you see. we've got it
entirely backwards these days
thinking sugar
causes diabetes.
It's just.
it's so backward and bizarre.
Nobody stands a chance.
I didn't think
we would have to clarify
what sugar does to your body.
But here are
just a few reasons
why it's bad for you.
Some people easily understand
that sugar is bad.
And they can avoid foods
that have sugar
or the sugar free things.
And the problem is.
it doesn't explain
all of the carbohydrate effect
on the blood sugar.
So starches.
including the breads. pasta.
rice. fruit. those things.
raise the blood sugar
just like real sugar
or actual sugar
and even honey.
natural sugar.
raises the blood sugar.
One of my favorite things
when you walk in to
Eric Westman's office.
and I've never walked in.
but people who have.
apparently there's a sign
on the wall that says that
fruit is nature's candy.
The reason that
sign is up there
is that most people
don't realize
that having fruit
can raise the blood sugar.
can make diabetes worse.
can lead to obesity.
It raises your blood sugar.
increases
the fat storing hormone insulin
and puts the body
into fat storing mode.
fat in the liver.
If you eat a lot of sugar.
you would end up
with a fatty liver
and that increases.
um. fasting insulin levels.
You get insulin resistance
and high insulin levels
all through the day.
Sugar is addictive.
And it may not be
addictive for everyone.
just like alcohol isn't
But it's addictive for
a large number of people.
I mean. I've been spending
the past at least 17 years
as a psychiatrist
talking to people.
thousands and thousands of
people hearing their stories.
And when I talk
to people about food.
there are many clues
to addiction in their stories.
My name is Georgia Ede.
I'm a psychiatrist.
Georgia Ede. the only words
I could come up with
for her is pioneer.
She's a psychiatrist.
She's a medical doctor.
And as a psychiatrist.
the first thing that happens
if you go to one of these
people with a problem
is they're looking to
put you on a medication.
Georgia. not the same thing.
Georgia is there.
uh. trying to figure out
if she can heal you.
number one.
without medication.
number two. which is
as important as number one.
let's try to do it with food.
Being preoccupied with food.
feeling guilty after eating
food that they think is.
"bad for them."
and spending a lot of time
thinking about food
that would be better spent
doing other things.
And I think that it's
one of the things
that people really
want a lot of help with.
When I'm talking to
people about food.
I hear the same patterns
as if I'm talking to somebody
with any other
substance abuse disorder.
For the average person.
that reward is enough
to keep you going.
keep you going.
And I can tell you personally.
when I get off carbohydrates.
I've known this for years.
you have a withdrawal.
I get all the same symptoms.
milder. mind you again.
So. I don't like
too powerful a connection
with addiction per se.
It minimizes the misery
of my patients.
But when I come
off carbohydrates.
get irritable. discontent.
I have pain.
I have sleeplessness.
I have anxiety.
Opiate withdrawal.
I have full on
opiate withdrawal
for three days every time.
That's what we're
trying to protect
against on a keto diet.
to try to stop that
raise of blood sugar
to prevent diabetes
or treat it
and to prevent
the insulin rise.
which is the hormonal state
of creating obesity.
We'll go
into depth about the
ketogenic diet momentarily.
But we first
have to understand
that most of our problems
stems from what industry
is doing.
And as I said inFat.
part one.
industry is a machine.
It's not a person.
It's a thing that's
designed to make money.
And that's it.
It's not good or bad.
it just is.
It's tough if you're
the sugar industry.
But the beverage industry
was always happy
to sell artificially
sweetened beverages
because artificial sweeteners
were cheaper than sugar
if nothing else.
They didn't care what
people drank as long as
they drank their products.
Grain industry. they could
create grain that's got
a lower glycemic index.
You have a lesson of
the 1980s when we told people
to create low fat foods.
they were happy to do it.
And they changed
the way we eat.
The problem is they
changed the way
we eat for the worse.
I think the tide is starting
to shift somewhat.
People now realize that
added sugars are not good.
I mean. there was a point.
it sounds ridiculous to say.
but there was a point where
people didn't quite realize
added sugars
were unhealthy for you.
Eating sugar
is not essential whatsoever.
And in fact. our body
will make sugar at a certain
point from eating protein.
The institute of medicine
itself acknowledges that
there is no essential need
for any carbohydrate.
The body needs a certain
amount of glucose
for the functioning of
its brain and its eyes.
But your body is
able to make that
glucose through a process
called gluconeogenesis
from the protein
that you consume.
Gluconeogenesis
is the process
by which your body will take
excess protein and convert it
into glucose.
Many people wonder
if there's a need for
carbohydrate in
the diet at all.
In other words. is there
an essential carbohydrate.
meaning the body
can't make it.
so you have to eat it.
That is in debate.
It's not clear.
One of the most
unbiased sources
of nutritional information.
the Institute of Medicine.
actually says pretty clearly.
"There is no
essential carbohydrate.
"You don't have
to eat carbohydrate."
Based on that. I wrote
a letter to the editor
some years ago
just questioning whether
carbohydrate was essential.
It's interesting that.
that letter has been cited
many. many times.
It was just a letter
to the editor.
Um. the science.
in regard to how you create
an essential nutrient
and what you
call a macronutrient.
So. when you're
on a keto diet.
your macronutrients
are proteins and fats.
The idea that
sugar had any benefit
actually stems from fallacies
propagated in the 1970s.
Ads in magazines
saying things like.
"Sugar can be the will power
you need to under eat."
There's a famous headline
for an FDA study that
hilariously reads.
"Government gives sugar
a clean bill of health."
That clean bill of health
was that the amount of sugar
that the FDA was estimating
we were consuming at the time.
which they said was 40 pounds
per capita. per year.
which was probably. uh.
40 to 60 pounds less
than we were consuming.
And then they said
we don't know what would happen
if we were to actually
consume more than
40 pounds per capita.
Virtually. the year that
they made that claim.
sugar consumption
then starts to skyrocket.
The reliable data you have
is on what's called
food availability.
How much sugar is
being made available
to the American public
by the industry and by imports.
And that number around
1800 was four pounds.
By 1984.
when the FDA said it was 40.
the food availability numbers
were already about
120 pounds per capita.
And they estimated
that we were consuming
about a third of that.
They're taking
what they know.
which is how much
is made available.
It's a reliable number
you could use to
compute trends from.
And then they're creating
this estimate of how much
we actually consume.
And then say. "Well.
40 pounds doesn't
sound like a lot."
But it's kind of
a meaningless number
because you have nothing
to compare it to.
It's certainly
ten to 20 times larger
than what we were consuming
150 years earlier.
They started doing this
in the 1940s
during World War II 'cause
we had to know how much food
was available
and what we could expect
to deal with food rationing
during the war.
And they kept it up
religiously since the 1940s.
And they backdated it to 1907
to get a feel for
what had happened
in the previous war
and World War I
to get this history.
And so if you accept
the backdated data from 1907.
it looks as though
we used to be eating
a lot less meat then.
And then we added
meat to our diets.
We added animal products.
and it went along
with this epidemic
of heart disease
that appeared to emerge
after the 1920s.
And the arguments
I make in my book
is both the USDA data
is faulty. and perhaps
what you have is
a correlation again
between two things.
Change in diet over time
and change in health status.
And it doesn't tell you that
there's any causality
between the two.
It just tells you
they're correlated.
Now you can
generate a hypothesis
and say we think
meat consumption
causes heart disease.
And then you can
do an experiment.
which is called a randomized
controlled trial
to test that hypothesis.
And that experiment
has never been done.
As we discussed
in the last film. money
has a lot to do with this.
When you don't spend
the money on the studies.
it's easy to say.
"There's no study
that says keto works."
These studies are
extremely expensive.
and there have been
enough good studies done
to support our
moderate approach.
which is looking
at balanced foods.
vegetables. fruits. grains
and lean meat
and dairy products.
How do you
know it doesn't work
if there's never been
any large scale studies?
Back before I wrote my book
Fitness Confidential.
I only had my clients
in LA who I worked with.
After the book came out.
and then the podcast
got popular.
now it wasn't just
20 or 30 students.
It was first hundreds.
and then thousands and then
tens of thousands.
So once you have
that many people
doing N=1.
and it's working. well.
it's not an N1
experiment anymore.
It's actually been
known for a long time
that the root cause
is eating too much.
and specifically.
carbohydrates.
So. um. 150 years ago.
the first treatment for obesity
was actually a low carb
ketogenic diet.
It was written about
in England.
and I find myself. um.
in a curious situation
where I'm just
reminding people
of something that
we've known
for 150 years.
That one. you know.
solution for the obesity
and diabetes epidemic
is a low carb.
ketogenic diet.
If you go back
to the 1970s.
Dr. Atkins
was considered a kook!
I remember the big
joke back then was.
"Do Atkins.
You'll lose weight.
"and then you'll be
a really good looking corpse
"because you're gonna
die from this diet."
Telling people that.
you know. beef is good
and so on is. you know.
or that butter is good or.
you know. telling people
what they want to hear
is a good way to sell books.
It's a good way to.
you know. magazines
are hurting for business
now on the Internet.
Everyone's looking for
something controversial
that they can tell people
what they want to hear.
and I understand that.
But it does people
a tremendous disservice.
The low carbohydrate
keto community is
based on science.
and I understand that
there are lots of ways
to be healthy.
You don't have to do
a low carbohydrate
ketogenic diet
if you don't have
carbohydrate tolerance.
Or if you don't have
insulin resistance.
you can eat lots
of different things.
And it's this insulin
resistance that can
drive so many
downstream markers
of inflammation
and glycation and other
detrimental processes
in our body
that can then lead
to heart disease.
So whether obesity
itself causes heart disease
or whether it's this
constellation of
health problems
that occur in people
who are obese.
that seems more likely.
People will say
to me emphatically.
"Well. keto is bad."
and I'll ask them why.
and there's no answer.
They'll just go. "It's bad.
My doctor said it was bad."
And it throws your body
into a state of emergency.
That's what ketosis is.
As we said
in the first movie.
ketosis and ketoacidosis
are two completely
different things.
Nutritional ketosis is
quite a different scenario.
Blood sugar's
absolutely under control.
The patient is healthy
in every single way.
Electrolytes. insulin. glucose.Perfectly. perfectly controlled.
We have now trained the body
to switch over from
burning carbohydrate
as the primary fuel.
Now the individual
becomes fat adapted.
and that's really
the difference between
a very unhealthy and
a very healthy state.
If we're going
to even pretend
we're on the same page.
we need to know
that basic fact.
A lot of the times
when even medical
professionals especially.
TV nutritionists describe
in essence what ketosis is.
they always point out
completely harmless
and sometimes
unproven things
to get you to not do it.
There are some
really interesting
side effects that
come with it.
Your autophagy process
is totally out of whack.
Disaster pants.
Zero calorie restriction
on a ketogenic diet.
Keto crotch.
If you have a sandwich
or something right now.
you might just want to go
ahead and put that down.
Animal fats
and animal proteins.
Unless you have epilepsy.
I'm not seeing a whole lot
of upside to this.
They're just...
They're desperate.
They're just desperate.
Bacterial vaginosis.
Rich in saturated fats.
Um. so. actually have not
done keto myself.
as you might guess. but...
The keto diet is
the sort of latest thing
which is already promoting
pushback from the community.
Like they're trying to tell
people don't even try it
because it's gonna give you
bad breath or constipation.
And therefore. you know.
if you weigh 300 pounds.
you should just continue
weighing 300 pounds.
Because if you lost 100. but
your breath smelled
like ketones.
that would be a tragedy.
Get all the benefit over here.
None of the negatives
over here.
and all the benefits
over there.
For a ketogenic diet is
a particularly. um.
I want to use the word
magical diet for many
neurological conditions.
Many brain and. uh.
body nervous
system conditions.
When you eat
a ketogenic diet.
you're using fat
primarily for energy.
and the brain is using.
uh. to a large extent.
ketones instead of glucose.
It can't use 100% ketones.
but about two-thirds
of its energy
can come from ketones
if you're eating a fat based
diet as opposed to
a carbohydrate based diet.
So we're not entirely
sure why this diet is so
healthy for the brain
and has been able to.
you know. help people
with early Alzheimer's disease
and Parkinson's disease
and seizure disorders.
but it stands to reason that
if these diets. which have
been used to treat epilepsy
now for almost 100 years.
perhaps longer.
if these diets can
be helpful in calming
brain chemistry in that way.
uh. perhaps they could be
helpful for other brain
disorders as well.
including
psychiatric disorders.
which have a lot in common
with neurological disorders...
Psychiatric disorders are
neurological disorders.
It's simply that
they manifest. um.
as changes in behavior
and emotion
as opposed to changes
in the sensory motor system
with the muscular system.
for example.
So the ketogenic diet.
with the way we think
it works is that
ketones burn cleanly
and more efficiently
than glucose does in the brain.
so you create
less oxidation.
less inflammation.
So I tell my patients
to think of refined
carbohydrates.
in particular. sugar. flour.
fruit juice. cereals
as mood destabilizers.
I think that there's a lot
of potential benefit here.
The science
is very. very new
when it comes
to psychiatric disorders
and ketogenic diets.
But it's emerging.
and it's all pointing
in the same direction.
It's very. very promising.
If we get this message out.
I think that there are
many doctors out there
who really want
to understand this
and would be open minded
and would be curious
to incorporate some
of these principles
into their practice
because we have
so many patients who
do not respond to medication
or who get side effects
from medication
or who don't want to take
medication or can't
afford medication.
And so isn't it wonderful
if we have something else
to offer those people?
When I got
into this field
in the early 2000s.
the sort of medical orthodoxy.
the dominant hypothesis
in the nutrition establishment
was that fat. saturated
fat. uh. cholesterol.
are terrible for health.
And if you believe otherwise
or if you wrote otherwise.
you would really
suffer as a scientist.
If you said
anything against that
orthodoxy in the field.
So here I come along. saying.
"Oh. you know. but this paper.
"the conclusions
don't reflect the data.
"Can you explain
that to me?"
Or. "This doesn't
seem to add up."
And people were terrified
to go on the record
saying anything against
this dominant hypothesis.
Because the cost to them...
There are real costs
to a scientist in challenging
that orthodoxy.
People who couldn't get
their papers published.
uh. because they had
said something that was
challenging to this orthodoxy.
They were disinvited
from expert conferences.
they could not get research
grants or their research
grants were canceled.
Scientists learn
to self-censor because
what they want to do
is they want to do science.
That's their job.
And if they
can't get money.
and if they can't
publish their papers
because they're talking out
in ways that their seniors
disapprove of.
then they can't
do their science.
So they really did not
want to talk about this issue
that was so deeply
risky to them.
But I've been told that
in order to get NIH funding.
they actually look
at how many times
your name appears
in the news media.
So there's this incentive
to make your studies
into this kind of click bait.
which is completely
irresponsible.
You know.
consumers don't know.
They're completely confused.
One of the clever kind
of rhetorical things that
Harvard and others. uh.
somebody like David Katz
at Yale do is they always
say like.
"You poor consumers.
you're so confused.
"And all these
Internet crazies out there.
"and book authors are
making you confused."
We are here.
assembled in Stockholm.
and all seem to agree
that we need a more
plant based diet
and they're talking
about how to achieve it.
And yet the public is
fascinated by the currently
prevailing meme
that we should all eat
more meat.
butter and cheese.
We have lost
the faith of the public.
We are like firefighters
who bicker among ourselves
about who has
the right caliber hose.
The mission is to get
there from here. and there
is a beautiful place.
the place we want
to bequeath to our children.
What is making people confused
is the publication of this
weak epidemiological data.
which almost 100%
of the time turns out
to be wrong.
I mean. what is the list
of things that epidemiology
has been wrong on?
Vitamin E supplements.
vitamin A supplements.
vitamin C supplements.
hormone replacement therapy
turned out to be killing women.
Uh. dietary cholesterol caps.
why we all ate egg white
omelets and avoided shellfish
for all that time.
That turned out to be
wrong and was retracted.
The low fat diet.
The government and
the American Heart Association
have backed off
the low fat diet.
Why were we eating
a low fat diet?
Because of epidemiology.
So the people confusing us
are the epidemiologists.
the experts themselves.
Most of the current
social media argument
is over extremes.
Go all vegan
or go all meat.
No one knows
who to trust.
and then both messages
get commercialized
and bastardized.
Now you're in fad diet land.
Now it's de facto quackery.
Because if it wasn't quackery.
why would you need this
cardiologist in New York.
this gynecologist in Brooklyn
writing about it instead
of it coming out of Harvard
or Cornell or Yale?
They've been fighting
this thing for 50 years.
and the longer you fight it.
again. now we're into
the cognitive dissonance.
the more you have to be right.
I have a lot of patients
who are confused.
or. at least tell me
about. uh. the vegan diet
and how. especially
among young women.
uh. my daughter included.
one of them.
um. it's very fashionable
to be a vegan.
and you feel like
you're doing the right
thing for animals.
but as a scientist.
I wanna promote
or recommend a diet
that's actually
healthy for humans.
not just for animals. right?
So I'm here to help
the person in front of me
in a clinic.
So I want the diet
to be as healthy
as possible.
and it's possible
with a vegan diet
to have. uh.
nutritional deficiencies.
Some of the nutrients
of concern in the vegan diet
include vitamin B12.
iron. calcium. vitamin D.
Omega-3 fatty acids.
including EPA and DHA.
and protein.
We found that
some of these nutrients.
which can have
implications in
neurologic disorders.
anemias. bone health
and other health concerns.
can be deficient
in vegan diets.
Low carb diets
for a vegetarian is possibly a successful approach.
We actually have
low carb vegetarians
who. um. perhaps can add
dairy or eggs or fish
and chicken to the diet.
And in this way. um.
they can lead a healthy life.
But I think it is fair to say
that. uh. we are omnivores
and animal based proteins
as well as plant based
proteins can be healthy for us.
You know. you can say
what the science says.
and then you can say what
people actually do
and actually stick with.
And you want a diet.
a nutritional program
that's gonna make
you feel good.
give you energy.
make it so you're not
hungry all the time.
so you don't have to think
about food all the time.
We get a lot of pushback
from the vegetarian community
where I think they.
I wish they would see
they were all arguing.
We all want people to be as
healthy as humanly possible.
and we want the ethical
decisions to be made on
the correct implications.
So if I'm going to risk
my health for the health of...
other species.
I want to know
that's what I'm doing.
I don't wanna
have the misconception
that I'm gonna be healthier
because that's what
I'm. you know...
Also that the ethical decision
is also the one
that's supported.
by. you know.
medical science.
All we do is talk and talk and talk about health
and at the same time.
we're just getting fatter
and more unhealthy.
If America is so worried
about its health.
how did we get so fat?
Because we have such
big problems with obesity.
Type 2 diabetes.
high blood pressure.
all kinds of diseases.
it's not surprising
that people
are more interested
in their health than ever
because they have to be.
You don't have to be
interested in your health
if everything's
all right. right?
It's only when you have
a problem that you need
to do something about it.
The myth is that. is that
the health care system
is the best place
to go to get healthy.
That's another
terrible myth
that so many people
are falling into that trap.
And. you know.
if you're acutely ill.
if you need a surgery.
if you have a bad infection.
the health care system
is fantastic.
But when it comes
to these chronic diseases
we're facing. unfortunately.
it is a myth that the health
care system is the best place
to address those.
There's a lot of information
today on the Internet.
It's a wonderful thing.
and it's a terrible thing.
There are people
who have their own
agendas to promote.
saying the darndest things.
and my patients watch those
and read them.
and I have to try
to correct them.
Based on the research.
we cannot say with
any certainty
that eating red or processed
meat causes cancer. diabetes
or heart disease.
The study recommends
adults continue
current red and processed
meat consumption.
It's a finding that's
prompted calls
for a retraction.
The most prominent critic.
Harvard School
of Public Health.
which labeled that conclusion "irresponsible and unethical."
It's crazy because
the more that we learn
that meat is healthy
and people are getting healthy. with these hundreds
of thousands
of N1 experiments.
the more the chasm grows
between the meat eaters
and the vegans.
I was watching one vegan
propaganda film about
a year ago.
and they were claiming
that eating one egg
is equivalent
to smoking five
cigarettes a day.
One egg.
I never really
thought about eggs much.
I just thought of them
as a standard part
of a healthy diet.
But then I found a study
suggesting that eating
just one egg a day
can be as bad as smoking
five cigarettes per day
for life expectancy.
In that case.
I'm smoking a pack
every morning.
It makes absolutely no sense.
The problem is. is people are
gonna watch these movies
and believe this.
Researchers found
a stepwise increase in risk
the more and more eggs
people ate.
Even just a single egg a week
appeared to increase the odds
of diabetes by 76%.
The reality is that a food
that has just fat.
or an egg. for example.
doesn't raise
the blood sugar at all.
It has a glycemic
index of zero.
and so if a site is
claiming that
the egg has a glycemic effect.
it's just not true.
Uh. eggs don't cause diabetes.
not unless you're eating
carbohydrates and you
put it all into
one mix together.
But. uh. the interesting
thing when you look at
the glycemic index
of different foods
is that the foods that
have no carbohydrates
are not on that list.
So oils. butter. eggs
have a glycemic
index of zero.
There is a fear.
unfounded fear
of the cholesterol
going up.
eating more fat.
more eggs.
And we now know that
it is an increase in
good cholesterol as well.
and a reduction
of the bad cholesterol
called triglyceride
or bad fats in the blood.
for example.
So the extreme case
of some people being
told not to do this
even though there're clear
benefits. based on a worry
about a long term
effect of cholesterol
is just sadly wrong.
and through the lens
of today's understanding
of the science.
So you look at who
gets heart disease.
You look at how many
eggs you're eating
and lo and behold.
people who eat eggs get more
heart disease
than people who don't.
They're probably not
as health conscious
as people who don't eat eggs.
'cause for 50 years
we've been told
don't eat eggs.
So very health conscious
people in the '90s...
I probably boiled
10.000 eggs in the '90s.
and I probably threw out
10.000 yolks.
Okay? Because the yolks
have fat and cholesterol
and we were taught
they were killing people.
So you do these studies.
and lo and behold.
you find out that people
who eat eggs have a higher
rate of heart disease.
That's a correlation.
And then you pretend
correlation is causation.
because that's why you did
this study to begin with.
And then you make this claim.
and then you have this
whole world.
then the people
who want to believe
that's true.
embrace the claim
and act like it's true
because they had a single
published study
that said it's true.
I don't think
these people really care
that much about whether
it makes us healthier.
Maybe they do.
I think they care
about the animals.
and that's a wonderful cause.
But that's not what
I'm trying to do
at the moment.
The group
says that activism
isn't violence.
and that they have
a love-based approach.
Not everyone's like you
that don't care about animals.
I do care about animals.
-You care about animals?
-Yeah. absolutely.
But you condemn them
to a slaughterhouse
when you eat them.
But if somebody
gives up meat
and goes vegetarian
or vegan and gets healthy
and they can control
their weight and they control
their blood sugar.
you know. then geez.
that's the greatest
thing in the world
and I'm happy for 'em.
But if they can do it
by eating a. you know.
a low carb. high fat diet.
which clearly people can.
then I think we should be
happy for them
and support it.
A high fat diet
is not unhealthy on its own
and should not be avoided.
even if you're
a green-only vegan.
Unless. in fact.
you don't like the food.
The myth still persists
that fat is going to kill you
or at the very least.
make you fat.
It's what I call
the tragic homonym.
The fat in bacon
is not the same
as the fat on your hips.
It's different. and another
idea that is just
deeply ingrained in us
is this idea that you know.
all green things are good.
all vegetables are good.
And vegetables
are good.
But again.
it's not "either or".
What does a doctor
say about adding fat?
Well. it sure seems logical
that the fat in the food
would become the
fat on your body.
you know. on your
bottom. for example.
But it turns out that it's
the insulin hormone inside
that creates the situation
for you to be able
to deposit the fat
and insulin is actually
generated by eating
carbohydrates.
So it's actually the dietary
carbohydrates. the sugars
and the starches
that are fattening.
But the confusion
comes into play because
if you're eating
carbohydrates and fats.
then you will get fat.
But it's not the fat
that caused it.
It was the carbohydrates
that led to the insulin
that caused the fat
to be fattening.
So another part
of the confusion is that
low fat diets work.
And. the problem is that
they cause excessive hunger
for most people.
and so they don't practically
work for many people.
And we've seen that
to be true because
the US has been advocating
low fat diets
for the last 30 years.
and it hasn't worked
practically for most Americans.
It's not that it can't work.
It's just that it hasn't been
a practical solution.
I've always thought
that our government
should operate according
to the principle.
like medical doctors.
when they swear an oath
to their profession.
that they should
at least do no harm.
You know. when they started
off the dietary guidelines.
they didn't even
have to know what to tell
Americans what to eat.
They just simply said.
have seven to 11 servings
of bread every day.
That was what
they told people.
Then they actually went
and told the food industry.
"You must go out and create
thousands of more low fat.
"and therefore high carb
food products for us."
The defenders of the nutrition
establishment say.
"Oh. we could not have
anticipated that people
would eat more sugars."
"It's not our fault that
they all went out and scarfed
down SnackWell cookies."
Well. the government told
the industry to make
those foods.
New SnackWell's
reduced fat candy!
Yes. like luscious
chocolate caramel.
not clusters.
And the American
Heart Association
was also putting its.
you know. heart healthy
check mark on. you know.
Frosted Flakes and Cocoa Puffs and all these foods
that were super
high in sugar.
But because they
didn't have a lot of fat.
they were considered healthy.
The only measure of health was
that it didn't have fat in it.
What a creamy
way to cut the fat.
Is the pendulum swinging?
That is a big question.
I think clearly it is.
in that there is a bottom-up
revolution going on.
The people who end up
in an obesity medicine
clinic like mine
happen to be the ones
who have the bad metabolism.
where a very small amount
of sugar or starch or grains
can be detrimental.
And so that's why
we're very strict
about teaching people
how to stay away
from those foods.
Teaching people
to have great foods.
things that they thought
they couldn't have.
like bacon
and pate and brie
and. you know.
depending where you live.
there's just
a wide array of foods
that don't have carbohydrates.
that are very
tasty and healthy.
It takes motivation
to do a diet.
And I've not really
been very motivated
to make a dietary change
the last few years.
I don't know why.
I don't know.
my head wasn't in that space.
but this is one
of the important
psychologies about dieting.
You have to decide
to make a change.
and I was doing
a podcast about
health and fitness.
so I thought.
"Walk it like you talk it.
so I better do it."
But I remember
it was a moment.
It's like any major change.
There's a moment
where you go.
"Okay. I'm gonna do this."
A lifestyle that
you can stick with.
that is going to help you
control your hormones.
your insulin hormones.
your fat storage hormones.
that's gonna be the best way
to lose weight in the long run.
Because we don't care
if you're gonna lose
weight in two weeks.
four weeks. six weeks.
That's not where health is.
Where health is. is permanently
reversing any metabolic damage.
making you healthy
on the inside.
and then weight loss
will follow.
You have to be ready to do it.
just like stopping smoking.
anything else.
If you're ready to do it.
you have to do it.
The great thing about
this diet is it's painless.
The diet itself is painless.
And once you make the change.
you feel so good.
it's self-sustaining.
You want to stay with it.
you want to optimize it.
and you certainly don't
want to lose what you've got.
There is a Credit Suisse
report that came out
a little while ago
saying the market
is going to shift on fats.
So you know. telling business.
"Get ready for this.
It's gonna change."
You know. we see butter sales
going through the roof.
We see meat consumption
actually increasing.
There are. there's signs
in the market
that consumer driven
demand is changing.
So there seems to be
somewhat of a groundswell.
You walk into grocery
stores and things.
There's now paleo.
the way things
used to be vegan.
You walk into bookstores
and there's books on low carb
and the computer is just
full of all of this stuff.
Look. I get it. We live
in a society where everyone
wants everything fast.
Just tell me what to do. You want no sugars. no grains.
Eat bacon. eat beef.
eat an avocado.
That's NSNG.
NSNG. you have gray areas.
-I know you want
the whole 30 right?
-Yep.
-It's like either you're in.
or you're out.
-Yeah.
-Eh.
NSNG. you could mess up
at noon time.
and you're right back
in that evening. you know?
And you just go with it.
As long as you're
cutting out sugars
and grains.
you're on point.
I've done well over
1700 podcasts at this point.
and I use one line in
each and every podcast.
Your good intentions
have been stolen.
I'm just here to try to help
you get them back.